Natural language generation NLG is one of the major subﬁelds of natural language processing, concerned with computing natural language 
sentences or texts that convey a given piece of information to an audience. While the output of a generation task can take many forms, 
including written text, synthesised speech, or embodied multimodal presentations, the underlying NLG problem in each case can be modelled 
as a problem of achieving a (communicative) goal by successively applying a set of (communicative) actions. This view of NLG as goal-
directed action has clear parallels to automated planning, which seeks to ﬁnd general techniques for eﬃciently solving the action 
sequencing problem.

The task of generating natural language from semantic representations (NLG) is typically split into two parts: the discourse planning task, 
which selects the information to be conveyed and structures it into sentence-sized chunks, and the sentence generation task, which then 
translates each of these chunks into natural language sentences. The sentence generation task is often divided into two parts of its own—the 
sentence planning task, which enriches the input by, e.g., determining object references and selecting some lexical material, and the 
surface realization task, which maps the enriched meaning representation into a sentence using a grammar. The chain of domain planning, 
sentence planning, and surface realization is sometimes called the “NLG pipeline”.

Viewing generation as a planning problem has a long tradition in the NLG literature. Perrault and Allen (1980) presented an approach to 
discourse planning in which the planning operators represented individual speech acts such as “request” and “inform”. This idea was later 
expanded, e.g., by Young and Moore (1994). On the other hand, researchers such as Appelt (1985) and Hovy (1988) used techniques from 
hierarchical planning to expand a high-level plan consisting of speech acts into more detailed speciﬁcations of individual sentences. 
Although these systems covered some aspects of sentence planning, they also used very expressive logics designed to reason about beliefs and 
intentions, in order to represent the planning state and the planning operators. Most of these systems also used ad-hoc planning algorithms 
with rather naive search strategies, which did not scale well to realistic inputs. As a consequence, the NLG-as-planning approach was mostly 
marginalized throughout the 1990s.

More recently, there has been a string of publications by various authors with a renewed interest in the generation-as-planning approach, 
motivated by the ongoing development of increasingly more eﬃcient and expressive planners. For instance, Koller and Stone (2007) propose an 
approach to sentence generation (i.e., the sentence planning and surface realization modules of the pipeline) as planning—an approach. 
Steedman and Petrick (2007) revisit the analysis of indirect speech acts with modern planning technology, viewing the problem as an instance 
of planning with incomplete information and sensing actions. In addition, Benotti (2008) uses planning to explain the accommodation of 
presuppositions, and Brenner and Kruijﬀ-Korbayov´a (2008) use multi-agent planning to model the joint problem solving behaviour of agents in 
a situated dialogue. While these approaches focus on diﬀerent issues compared to the 1980’s NLG-as-planning literature, they all apply 
existing, well-understood planning approaches to linguistic problems, in order to utilise the rich set of modelling tools provided by modern 
planners, and in the hope that such planners can eﬃciently solve the hard search problems that arise in NLG (Koller and Striegnitz 2002). 
This paper aims to investigate whether existing planners achieve this latter goal.

One way of modelling the sentence generation problem is to assume a lexicalized grammar in which each lexicon entry speciﬁes how it can be 
combined grammatically with the other lexicon entries, what piece of meaning it expresses, and what the pragmatic conditions on using it 
are. Sentence generation can then be seen as constructing a grammatical derivation that is syntactically complete, respects the semantic and 
pragmatic conditions, and achieves all the communicative goals.

NLG and planning have a long history in common. The recent surge in NLG-as-planning research presents valuable opportunities for both 
disciplines. Clearly, NLG researchers who apply planning technology will beneﬁt directly from any improvements in planner eﬃciency. 
Conversely, NLG may also be a worthwhile application area for planning researchers to keep in mind. Domains like GIVE highlight certain 
challenges, such as plan execution monitoring and plan presentation (i.e., sum-marisation and elaboration), but also oﬀer a platform on 
which such technologies can be evaluated in experiments with human users. Furthermore, although we have focused on classical planning 
problems in this work, research related to reasoning under uncertainty, resource management, and planning with knowledge and sensing, can 
also be investigated in these settings. As such, we believe our domains would provide interesting challenges for planners entered in future 
editions of the IPC.
